At the outset, I have chosen to write this in order to treat of a subject of no small interest, and if I could point out the obvious in this kind of chronicle, it may be of course that I didn't choose of my own free will to begin writing this, it may be in fact that I had no choice in the matter at all. To help me decide whether I did or didn't choose to write this, I must clarify further.

So just to start with a very subtle nuance, I think there is no free will whatsoever, I think that is abundantly clear, and on top of that, I think if people started believing that, it would be a far more humane world, and this would be a wonderful thing. Now, looking at the fact that people hold on very firmly and strongly to the notion of free will, I want to try to unpack one of the things that really, sort of, fuels that stance, which is we make decisions, we make choices, we sit there, we choose vanilla over chocolate ice cream, we choose to pull a trigger or not to do so, we are full of intent at that moment and we make a choice simply. There is something intuitively truly seductive about that, and unpacking the choice and the intent, we know we have the intent at that point, we have a pretty good sense what the consequence is going to be, we know we're not being coerced, there are alternatives available to us and to most people and to the courts of law in every land on earth, that's enough, you have responsibility. And my starting point is, that tells us naught whatsoever about free will, it is completely irrelevant to it.
Whether we form the intent to do this or to do that, it's entirely irrelevant for a very simple reason, because assessing behavior based on that, is like reviewing a movie when all you've seen is the last three minutes of the movie, because what you're never ever asking with that stance is, where did that intent come from? How did you become the sort of person where that is the sort of intent you would form at that moment, because that's really the only thing to do and it's the only question to ask.

Now, let me give you a scenario that is laden with intent and choice, you got two people, they go in, they watch a movie, the movie is some inspirational stuff about some guy who previously has been obscure and now does something incredibly heroic, and the first person comes out of the movie with an intent and a choice, they say, "Oh my god, that was so inspirational, right now, I'm going to go over to that booth by the popcorn stand and I'm going to sign over my life saving to doctors without borders, that's how inspired I am and I intend to do that." The second person has an intent and he makes a choice at that point and they say, "Oh my god, that was the most outrageously manipulative movie, I can't believe that script, the cinematography was terrible, I'm outraged and offended that they would charge me, I'm outraged at the theater and I'm going to go right now and demand my money back." Okay, so we see two people who acted with intent, made choices and the question obviously then is, how did they become the sorts of people where those are the choices that they would make, where those are the intents they would form. And if you come from the realm of biology, that's a whole hierarchy of question, because there is a whole hierarchy of things that went into each of those people intending to do what they do. Part of what was playing out in the previous minutes to hours, were they angry? Were they hungry? Were they in pain or sleep deprived? Were they stressed or scared or whatever? Because we know people's choices will change dramatically in those circumstances, people's judgments, people's executive control, people's capacity to make one site type of decision, if it is a tougher one but it is more appeating in the long run, so that matters. What also matters in the previous hours to days, are hormone levels, because that will have an enormous impact, if you had elevated levels of oxytocin, you're more likely to be trusting what the movie was telling you, if you had elevated levels of testosterone, you were more likely to be pissed off and perceive the movie makers as having bad intent. But you also have to ask what was going on in the previous months to decades, as one example, if you had had a trauma, and you now have PTSD, post-traumatic stress disorder, a structure in your brain, the amygdala will have grown larger, and we can tell you down to the molecules exactly how that works, and when you have an amygdala like that, in circumstances that other people would decide are neutral, you're going to decide it's provocative and threatening, and even though we understand much less about it, the same changes and the same drama would have occurred in your brain, if in the previous months of a decade, you have found love, you had found God... all of that matters. So now, we have to barrel back to adolescence and childhood, and I think no one needs to be convinced by now that the type of childhood you have, influences the type of adult you become, what we've been learning since are the nuts and bolts, the epigenetics of how the brain you have as an adult sitting and watching that movie is going to be vastly influenced by how many traumas you had as a child, how much adversity, how much stimulation, and there's a whole world of developmental people who even have a scoring system, what is your ace score? Your adverse childhood experience score? Were you physically abused?
Psychologically? Sexually? Were you witness to? Did you have a family member who was incarcerated? Was there somebody with a substance abuse problem? And each additional score you get in that questionnaire, there is about a pretty high percentage increased chance that, by young adulthood, you will have a history of antisocial violence. Childhood matters. The culture you were raised in as a child matters as well. Are you raised in a culture of honor? Because as an adutt, you are more likely to advocate aggressive responses to ambiguous social circumstances, and you're more likely to secrete stress hormones at the time. Were you raised in an individualistic or a collectivist culture? Because that's going to influence your levels of trust and cooperation with people you don't know. Were you raised in a culture with some specific values, with that to turn the other cheek, to take revenge because if they take your camel now and you do nothing, tomorrow, they'll take the rest of your camels, all of this is instantiated in the brain you develop. But you got to push back even further, back to your fetal life, because what was going on there was directing the brain and its construction that you are going to have now in that moment forming that intent in that movie theater.
If, for instance, you were exposed to a lot of stress hormones as a foetus, because mom was stressed as hell, trying to pay the rent, being homeless or whatever, you're surely going to develop a larger amygdala, and as a result, you're going to have an elevated stress response, which is going to make your judgement and executive control not as effective as usual. If you were as a foetus deprived of calories, as an adult, you're more likely to form the intent, screw human right movements and screw getting my money back, l'm going to get a lot more popcorn, because you will have developed with fewer dopamine neurons in your reward area, and you will have less satiation, plus you will be more prone towards adult onset diabetes, metabolic syndrome, hypertension, obesity, all of that because of your fetal life. Then, we got to push a step further back. Genes determine next to nothing, people have to be weaned off to this notion of sort of genetic molecular fundamentalism, but what genes do is influence how you are going to respond to environment, and by now, we know we differ from one person to the next, due to the variance of genes we have related to hormones like oxytocin and vasopressin, how able are you to have empathy? How trusting are you? How generous? Hormone genes related to your stress response, do you see threat that other people don't? Genes related to your vulnerability to mood disorders, anxiety disorders... Genes related to your propensity towards violence, depending on whether you were abused as a child or not. All of these come into it.

You've got to push one step further back. Culture. Where did that come from? if your ancestors grew up in a world with a heavy infectious disease load, you're likely to be more hostile to immigration, if your ancestors grew up as shepherds, you're more likely to be aggressive than if they grew up as farmers. Where is behavior coming from? Where is responsibility coming from? It's coming from one second ago to thousands of years ago, and what we have here is a number of punchlines, the first one is, history matters, the past isn't even past, and what we see over and over is the biology of why luck does not out over time, instead, bad luck amplifies and good luck and privilege amplify in the opposite direction. What we also see is, a realm where these are not just biological influences. If you're talking about genes, you're talking about their evolution, you're talking about the epigenetics your fetal life that regulate them, you're talking about the proteins they made twenty minutes ago, it forms one continuous arc of biology in which there is not a crack there into which you can shoehorn free will. If it was five hundred years ago, and somebody said, "Wow, we just noticed when people get hammered over the head, their behavior changes" The brain may be relevant, that's one thing, we know a ton now, we know enough to present the challenge, show me a brain, a person who has just done something completely independent of every one of those biological environmental influences I just outlined, and you're proven there is free will, and at this point, we know enough of this biology that the onus is on the free will believers unless you can show evidence of people's actions and people's behaviors, personalities, proclivities, desires...etc being independent of their biological environmental history.
Therefore, with no evidence provided, the only default stance there is, is to doubt that it exists, to not accept its existence.

Amazingly enough, I don’t agree with everything that have been said by free will believers, amid my greatly admiring sort of the eloquence with which they’ve argued for free will. It’s ridiculous to say that anything good can happen to a machine, nonetheless, at my very core, I think it is a good thing when we are made to have lives with less pain and more happiness. One of the things I agree on with free will believers, both of us agree, lest we get caught in the sort of mud with this, we both think punishment and reward are okay to use in an instrumental sense, as long as they are for practical purposes, not because people “deserve” them in some deep metaphysical sense. So, where we’re not in agreement is the following. The first issue is an interesting one, in terms of the description of the evolution theory, for instance, saying we do not flay people and burn them at the stake anymore, we have evolved, and in some way, I think that this is equating that we have evolved to have more free will, because that’s yoking our capacity for self-control to evolution an awful lot. The fact that we don’t burn people at the stake anymore, I think, shows exactly the opposite, which is over and over throughout history, we have learned that, oh, someone actually is not responsible of this, somebody doesn’t control the weather, and thus, deserves to be burned at the stake as a witch, oh, somebody has an epileptic seizure, not because they’re sleeping with Satan, oh, somebody has trouble with learning to read, because they have dyslexia, and we know the neuroanatomy of it rather than they’re lazy and unmotivated at each one of these steps where we have subtracted out responsibility, where we have viewed the world as having less free will, it’s become a much nicer place to live in. Now, when it comes to the second point, sort of the allusion to what I think is another incredibly tempting seductive way in which to get into trouble, which is to make this false dichotomy. Yes, most people will admit we have no control over some of the attributes that we were given, that we were gifted with, that we were cursed with, and so on. Some of us are tall, some of us have perfect pitch, some of us have good memory spans for digits, some of us this or that, and we were given these traits, most of people will now believe rather than being Calvinists, that this was outside our realm of control. What people then do is this leapfrog over this Grand Canyon of a false dichotomy into, but where we have free will is what we do with those attributes, do we show tenacity? Do we show gumption and backbone when the going gets tough? Does the tough get going? Do we show self-control? Or conversely, are we privileged and gifted and we squander it away with self-indulgence? The seduction is these things like, “Oh, how good your memory span is? What type of receptor you have for this neurotransmitter relevant to this memory?” “Yes, that stuff you were given, but what you do with it, more gumption in your control or lack thereof, that’s made of fairy dust, that’s magical stuff and a completely different category. What we see is self-control as biological of a trait as is your eye color, as is your capacity to play the piano, as is your height. It is different kind of biology for my money, it’s a hell of a lot more interesting biology, but it’s just as biological, and what it’s embedded in, is a squishy real biologically yucky part of the brain called the prefrontal cortex. You develop a good prefrontal cortex, you’re going to be good at showing self-control as an adult. You will be better at doing the hard thing when it's the right thing to do. Are we responsible for the sort of prefrontal cortices we have, not a chance. Here is one example that should stop people right in their tracks that should have people out, you know yelling at the barricades and singing like revolutionary songs, by the time a child is five years old, the socioeconomic status of their parents is already a predictor of the thickness of their prefrontal cortex and its metabolic rate, and big surprise it goes in the direction of, if you very imprudently intended and chose to be born into a family in poverty, you're going to have a screwed up prefrontal cortex on the average by the time you're five years old, bad luck evens out over time, gumption is not made of biology, this is the biology which every step along the afterward is the biology and interactions with environment of why at virtually every juncture this person is going to make the wrong decision and go in the wrong direction, and it has as little to do with choice or free will as your eye color does. I think the final point I want to make with that is running through that is a notion again of the gumption angle, it's a source of pulling out judgment and responsibility which I think is simply antithetical or where the science is. if I can have a quote of an author that I read previously: "A good runner who starts at the back of the pack, if he is really good enough to deserve winning, will probably have plenty of opportunities to overcome the initial disadvantage." In other words, if he fails to show sufficient gumption to make up for that deficit, he doesn't deserve to win, it is a moral judgement that he wasn't able to overcome his initial bad luck because control is made out of magic, control is something that is not made out of biology. I obviously strongly disagree with that, I think the very last point is there's another realm which I think is pretty seductive for free will believers, into a great embrace of free will, which is, they've got a lot more faith in intuition than I think is justified. For example, they have the really interesting two-stage model of decision which, let's not get into it, but I disagree with blah blah big surprise, but the saying about one its strengths is its alignment with our intuitions. Another quote that I've read: " "That model" provide some account of our important intuition that we are the authors of our moral decisions." In other words, that "model" for why there is some free will is more acceptable because it fits with our intuitions that we have free will, and I think my last point that i want to make here is, intuition is a really lousy guide for thinking about how the world works. Let me give you an example, I will bet with free will believers, if you and I, were sitting in a café four hundred years ago, and we were the exact same people and just as reflective, and we would've given money to a radio station if it existed at the time and all of that, and we would've been the same reasonable people, it would have been probably intuitively obvious to us that certain people are meant to be slaves, in fact, they're so incapable of taking care of themselves, it's a blessing to enslave them and feed them and clothe them and that, and that's not intuitively obvious to us anymore, it's not intuitively obvious that it's okay to have four year olds working in factories, but in the past, it would've seemed intuitively trivial to us as wett, it's no longer intuitively trivial that a kid who has a cortical malformation and as a result reverses looped letters and has trouble learning to read because of their dyslexia, it's no longer intuitively obvious to us that they're lazy and unmotivated, but forty to fifty years ago, I suspect both of us would have found it obvious that this is a kid who just really isn't paying attention and isn't motivated. Over and over and over, our intuitions have proven wrong, over and over, when we realize our intuitions are very poor litmus test and we recognize we are intuitively punishing and rewarding and judging and all of that, for things people had no control over, over and over when we recognize that these intuitions in fact are based on responsibility which is simply not there. And that's a tremendous challenge for us, we are biological machines, just like amoeba are, but we are the only biological machines that can know our machiness, and that produces everything from self-reflection to phenomenal neurosis to denial to everything else on earth. We're the only ones who are capable of simultaneously saying, "Wow, that's nice that that person just complimented me on the color of my eyes!" While saying that's completely asinine, I have nothing to do with it. And to say, "Wow, that's a great job that you did, that you're now a CEO of the company!" and recognize at the same time, that you were already born on third base, you had already everything. We're a weird troubled species for that reason, because we can know our machiness at the same time that we can fall for the palpability which we feel as if we are captains of our own fate, and what that winds up meaning is that it's hard to keep that in mind, but keep it in mind when it really matters, for when you're judging harshly.
The world becomes a better place, it really is a very good thing that we figured out witches don't control the weather and we figured out that rotten psychoanalytically poisonous mothers don't cause schizophrenia, and that people with a certain variant of a gene for the leptin receptor have trouble having their brain satiate rather than them just hating themselves, and thus, eating themselves into obesity at every one of these steps, our initial intuitions have proven very very suspect and wrong and at each step when we actually learn what's going on, we subtract responsibility out of it, and not only doesn't the societal roof fall in, it becomes a much better place to live in.
